ILAB Phase 3 Github Markdown Documentation (#254)
opendatahub-io/ilab-on-ocp: standalone/instructlab-pipelines-with-dsp-on-rhoai-.md

# Running InstructLab Pipeline with Data Science Pipelines on RHOAI

This file provides step-by-step instructions for setting up and using the Data Science Pipelines (DSP) for InstructLab iterations.

## Pre-requisites

* An OpenShift cluster with
  * Sufficient GPUs available for training.

>     * 4x NVIDIA A100 GPUs

Reviewer: If the GPUs require a certain amount of GPU memory it would be good to include this info too. Also, it would be good to be explicit that we need X gpus for training and Y gpus for the teacher and judge models

  * Red Hat - Authorino installed
  * Red Hat Openshift Serverless installed
  * Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh v2 (v3 is not compatible with RHOAI)

>   * Red Hat OpenShift AI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Red Hat OpenShift AI and operator dependencies documented at [OpenShift AI Supported Configurations](https://access.redhat.com/articles/rhoai-supported-configs))
```

    * [Deploy a judge model server](#deploy-a-judge-model-server-optional) (Optional)
    * [Deploy judge model serving details](#deploy-judge-model-serving-details)
    * [Deploy a teacher model server](#deploy-a-teacher-model-server-optional) (Optional)
    * [Deploy teacher model serving details](#deploy-teacher-model-serving-details)
1. [Setup NFS StorageClass](#optional---setup-nfs-storageclass) (Optional)
1. [Set Up Data Science Pipelines Server and Run InstructLab Pipeline](#set-up-data-science-pipelines-server-and-run-instructLab-pipeline)

### Prepare data and push to object store

Create a tarball with the [granite-7b-starter] model and [taxonomy tree] and push them to your object store.

```bash
$ mkdir -p s3-data/{model,taxonomy}
```

Download ilab model repository in s3-data model directory
```bash
# You can also use Oras or Skopeo cli tools to download the model
# If using other tools besides ilab, ensure that filenames are mapped
# appropriately
$ ilab model download --repository docker://registry.redhat.io/rhelai1/granite-7b-starter --release 1.2
$ cp -r <path-to-model-downloaded-dir>/rhelai1/granite-7b-starter/* s3-data/model
```

> Add your taxonomy tree to the `taxonomy` directory

Reviewer: I think this step is not needed. The pipeline has a parameter with an external git repository containing the taxonomy. @gmfrasca @rimolive can you confirm?

```bash
$ cd s3-data
$ cp path/to/your/taxonomy/tree taxonomy
```
> [!NOTE]
> Note: see https://github.com/instructlab/taxonomy.git for an example taxonomy tree

Generate tar archive
```bash
$ cd s3-data
$ tar -czvf rhelai.tar.gz *
```

Upload the created tar archive to your object store.

> The `standalone.py` script will do a simple validation check on the directory structure, here is a sample of what

Reviewer 2: standalone.py no longer used in Phase 2, change this to 'The pipeline'

  namespace: <data-science-project-name/namespace>
```

Upload [prometheus-8x7b-v2-0 model] (Judge-Model) to the same object storage as before.

For example using `ilab` to download and `s3cmd` to sync to object store you can do:
```bash
# You can also use Oras or Skopeo cli tools to download the model
# If using other tools besides ilab, ensure that filenames are mapped
# appropriately
ilab model download --repository docker://registry.redhat.io/rhelai1/prometheus-8x7b-v2-0 --release 1.2

# Default cache location for ilab model download is ~/.cache/instructlab/models
s3cmd sync path/to/model s3://your-bucket-name/judge-model/
```

Navigate to the OpenShift AI dashboard
* Choose Data Science Projects from the left hand menu and choose your data science project/namespace.
* Choose the data connections tab, and click on the Add data connection button. Enter the details of your S3 bucket (object store) and click Add data connection.

> [!NOTE]
> Note: Before following the next step - Ensure that the `CapabilityServiceMeshAuthorization` status is `True` in `DSCinitialization` resource.

Create a model server instance
* Navigate to Data Science Projects and then the Models tab

> * On the right hand side select ‘Deploy model’ under Single-model serving platform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* On the right hand side select **Deploy model** under Single-model serving platform
```

Reviewer 2: Applicable to entire review: We should standardize on the "selectable"/ highlighted terms.  I'm using Bold (double asterisks), but we could use double quotes, italics, backticks, etc.

* Under Serving runtime choose the serving runtime `vLLM Serving Runtime for Kserve`.
* Check the `Make deployed models available through an external route` box.
* Under token authentication check the `Require token authentication` box, write the name of the service account that we have created above.
* Choose the existing data connection created earlier.
* Click deploy.

[prometheus-8x7b-v2-0 model]: https://catalog.redhat.com/software/containers/rhelai1/prometheus-8x7b-v2-0/6682611224ba6617d472f451

#### Deploy judge model serving details

Create a secret containing the judge model serving details

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: <judge-model-details-k8s-secret>
  namespace: <data-science-project-name/namespace>
type: Opaque
stringData:

>   JUDGE_NAME:               # Name of the judge model or deployment

Reviewer 2: add token placeholdlers similar to above, like `JUDGE_NAME: <name-of-judge-model>  # Name of the judge model or deployment`

  JUDGE_ENDPOINT:           # Model serving endpoint, Sample format - `https://<deployed-model-server-endpoint>/v1`
  JUDGE_API_KEY:            # Deployed model-server auth token
  JUDGE_CA_CERT:            # Configmap containing CA cert for the judge model (optional - required if using custom CA cert), Example - `kube-root-ca.crt`
  JUDGE_CA_CERT_CM_KEY:     # Name of key inside configmap (optional - required if using custom CA cert), Example - `ca.crt`
```

> [!NOTE]
> Note: If using a custom CA certificate you must provide the relevant data in a ConfigMap. The config map name and key

> > are then provided as a parameter to the standalone.py script as well as in the `judge-serving-details` secret above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> are then provided as a parameter to the pipeline as well as in the `judge-serving-details` secret above.
```

If you deployed the Judge server model using the optional instructions above then you can retrieve `JUDGE_API_KEY` by
running the following command:

```bash
JUDGE_API_KEY=$(oc -n <data-science-project-name/namespace> create token judge-sa)
```

#### Deploy a teacher model server (Optional)

Unlike the Judge model we have to deploy the Teacher model manually on RHOAI, this consists of deploying the K8s resources
using `oc`.

First, upload the Teacher model to s3 if it does not already exist there:

```bash

> # You can also use Oras or Skopeo cli tools to download the model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# You can also use ORAS or Skopeo cli tools to download the model
```

      - get
    apiGroups:
      - serving.kserve.io
    resources:
      - inferenceservices
    resourceNames:
      - mixtral
---
kind: RoleBinding
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: mixtral-view
  labels:
    opendatahub.io/dashboard: 'true'
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    name: mixtral-sa
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: Role
  name: mixtral-view-role
---
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: mixtral-serving-ilab
  labels:
    opendatahub.io/dashboard: 'true'
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 200Gi
  storageClassName: standard-csi
  volumeMode: Filesystem
```

</details>

```bash
oc -n <data-science-project-name/namespace> apply -f pre_requisites.yaml
```

You will need to ensure that the `storage-config` secret exists in the `<data-science-project-name/namespace>` namespace.
And this `storage-config` has the configuration for the bucket where the teacher model is stored.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
stringData:
  aws-connection-my-bucket: |
    {
      "type": "s3",
      "access_key_id": "your_accesskey",
      "secret_access_key": "your_secretkey",

>       "endpoint_url": "https://s3-us-east.amazonaws.com",

Reviewer 2: minor nitpick: the region is `us-east-1` or `us-east-2`.  that said, perhaps we should suggest something generic since we're also providing `mybucket`, `your_accesskey`, etc

          memory: 60Gi
          nvidia.com/gpu: "4"
      runtime: mixtral
      storage:
        # the secret name of the secret deployed earlier
        key: aws-connection-my-bucket
        # update this to match the path in your bucket
        path: <prefix-path-to-mixtral-model-in-s3>
    tolerations:
    - effect: NoSchedule
      key: nvidia.com/gpu
      operator: Exists
```

</details>

```bash
oc -n <data-science-project-name/namespace> apply -f servingruntime.mixtral.yaml
oc -n <data-science-project-name/namespace> apply -f inferenceservice.mixtral.yaml
```

A new pod named `mixtral-predictor-0000#-deployment-<hash>` should be created. This should result in a successful
running pod. If the pod does not come up successfully, you inspect the `.status` field for the `InferenceService`
for issues.

```bash
oc -n <data-science-project-name/namespace> get inferenceservice mixtral -o yaml
```

#### Deploy teacher model serving details

Create a secret containing the Teacher model serving details

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: <teacher-model-details-k8s-secret>
  namespace: <data-science-project-name/namespace>
type: Opaque
stringData:

>   api_key:              # Deployed model-server auth token

Reviewer 2: same as above - lets provide `<placeholder-values>` to stay consistent in our yamls

  endpoint:             # Model serving endpoint, Sample format - `https://<deployed-model-server-endpoint>/v1`
  model: mixtral        # Name of the teacher model or deployment
  SDG_CA_CERT:          # Configmap containing CA cert for the teacher model (optional - required if using custom CA cert), Example - `kube-root-ca.crt`
  SDG_CA_CERT_CM_KEY:   # Name of key inside configmap (optional - required if using custom CA cert), Example - `ca.crt`
```

> [!NOTE]
> Note: If using a custom CA certificate you must provide the relevant data in a ConfigMap. The config map name and

> > key are then provided as a parameter to the standalone.py script as well as in the `teacher-model-details-k8s-secret` secret above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> key are then provided as a parameter to the pipeline as well as in the `teacher-model-details-k8s-secret` secret above.
```

```
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: dashboard.opendatahub.io/v1
  kind: AcceleratorProfile
  metadata:
    name: gpu
    namespace: redhat-ods-applications
  spec:
    displayName: gpu
    enabled: true
    identifier: nvidia.com/gpu
    tolerations: []
```
#### Signed Certificate:
A signed certificate ensures that there are not any unnecessary issues when running the training pipeline.

To deploy a signed certificate in your cluster follow [trusted cluster cert](signed-certificate/README.md) documentation.

This will create the required resources in the cluster, including the required StorageClass.

### Set Up Data Science Pipelines Server and Run InstructLab Pipeline

Now we can continue to set up the required resources in our cluster.

The following resources will be created:

1. ConfigMap
2. Secret
3. ClusterRole
4. ClusterRoleBinding
5. Pod

Create a configMap that contains the [standalone.py script](standalone.py)

```bash
$ curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/red-hat-data-services/ilab-on-ocp/refs/heads/rhoai-2.16/standalone/standalone.py
$ oc create configmap -n <data-science-project-name/namespace> standalone-script --from-file ./standalone.py
```

> 

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't need the standalone script anymore, that was for Phase 2

Create a secret resource that contains the credentials for your Object Storage (AWS S3 Bucket)

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: sdg-object-store-credentials
type: Opaque
stringData:
  bucket:                     # The object store bucket containing SDG+Model+Taxonomy data. (Name of S3 bucket)
  access_key:                 # The object store access key (AWS Access key ID)
  secret_key:                 # The object store secret key (AWS Secret Access Key)
  data_key:                   # The name of the tarball that contains SDG data.
  endpoint:                   # The object store endpoint
  region:                     # The region for the object store.

>   verify_tls:                 # Verify TLS for the object store.

Reviewer 2: provide `<placeholder-values>`

```

Apply the yaml file to the cluster

Create a ServiceAccount, ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding

> Provide access to the service account running the standalone.py script for accessing and manipulating related resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Provide access to the service account running the pipeline for accessing and manipulating related resources.
```

<p align="center"><img src="assets/images/configure_pipeline_server.png" width=50%\></p>

### Run the Pipeline

Now that all the cluster requirements have been setup, we are ready to upload and run our InstructLab pipeline!

#### Upload the Pipeline:

Now we can go back to our RHOAI Data Science Pipelines dashboard and select **"Import pipeline"**. We recommend importing the pipeline yaml directly from the github repo using: `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/opendatahub-io/ilab-on-ocp/refs/heads/main/pipeline.yaml`
<p align="center"><img src="assets/images/import_pipeline.png" width=50%\></p>

#### Create a Run:
Once the pipeline is uploaded we will be able to select **"Create run"** from the **"Actions"** dropdown. This will present us with a number of parameters we can set to customize our run. Click **"Create run"** at the bottom of the page to kick off your InstructLab pipeline.

<p align="center"><img src="assets/images/parameters.png" width=50%\></p>

> #### Available Pipeline Parameters:

Reviewer: What about adding two additional sections providing example pipeline parameters?

* Example pipeline parameters for a quick pipeline run:
Example parameters to do a quick test that can be run in aprox 90m using x NVIDIA XXX GPUs

* Example pipeline parametes for a  full pipeline run

@rimolive and @gmfrasca can probably provide these examples

|`mt_bench_merge_system_user_message` |MT Bench parameter. Boolean indicating whether to merge system and user messages (required for Mistral based judges)|
|`final_eval_max_workers` |Final model evaluation parameter for MT Bench Branch. Number of workers to use for evaluation with mt_bench or mt_bench_branch. Must be a positive integer or 'auto'.|
|`final_eval_few_shots` |Final model evaluation parameter for MMLU. Number of question-answer pairs provided in the context preceding the question used for evaluation.|
|`final_eval_batch_size` |Final model evaluation parameter for MMLU. Batch size for evaluation. Valid values are a positive integer or 'auto' to select the largest batch size that will fit in memory.|
|`final_eval_merge_system_user_message` |Final model evaluation parameter for MT Bench Branch. Boolean indicating whether to merge system and user messages (required for Mistral based judges)|
|`k8s_storage_class_name` |A Kubernetes StorageClass name for persistent volumes. Selected StorageClass must support RWX PersistentVolumes.|

> [RBAC configuration]: https://github.com/opendatahub-io/ilab-on-ocp/tree/main/standalone#rbac-requirements-when-running-in-a-kubernetes-job

Reviewer 2: should copy this documentation somewhere not in 'standalone' folder
